Zeljko Ivezic: Oh.
Zeljko Ivezic: yeah, at the beginning of the lecture there is a list of things that my needs.
Zeljko Ivezic:  Oh, okay.
Zeljko Ivezic: okay. I'll have to look at it later.
Zeljko Ivezic: Hmm!
Zeljko Ivezic: Of it!
Zeljko Ivezic: People on zoom. Can you hear us?
Akshay Kumar Remeshan: Oh, yes, yes.
Zeljko Ivezic: we'll start. I see about half the class with a business collection program, and they do not want to be on the camera today.
Zeljko Ivezic: first, let me apologize for not putting lecture in the right place. I just uploaded this morning. If you've been trying to download it during the weekend.
Zeljko Ivezic: I put it to different Github Repository didn't notice that it was wrong one. So today we are going to introduce one heavy duty professional method. So in the first 4 lectures
Zeljko Ivezic: we were going through the basics, some simple simulations or analytic results just to give you a little bit of theoretical background
Zeljko Ivezic: for by Asian statistics. But the real power of
Akshay Kumar Remeshan: they processing comes when you have large data, sets
Zeljko Ivezic: many variables in many dimensions, with many, 3 parameters.
Zeljko Ivezic: and of course, in such like setting
Zeljko Ivezic: we cannot
Zeljko Ivezic: use analytic solutions, we can only rely on numerics.
Zeljko Ivezic: So the last 2 lectures will be about the most important. Such framework, called Markov Chain, in the
Zeljko Ivezic: which is essentially a numerical solution to
Zeljko Ivezic: today. You'll go over the introduction, and it will work out 2 examples of regression, of fitting functions to data.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then next time we will conclude. we
Zeljko Ivezic: modeled selection. But much more complicated case than what's immediately now with an unlimited approach.
Zeljko Ivezic: So let me quickly remind you of the following.
Zeljko Ivezic: that was our example of
Zeljko Ivezic: drawing data from galaxy and distribution
Zeljko Ivezic: described by Mu and sigma on X X's. We have mu on y axis. We have sigma, and given some data set, you can write down the posterior probability density function. So this is 2 dimensional case. And so where it's black in the image that means 5 probability.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then it's white. It makes 92 probability.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so it's. What we want to do now is to take this two-dimensional case, and we want to find our best fit parameters that corresponds to the maximum of this two-dimensional.
Zeljko Ivezic: This is just 2 dimensional function practice. We often work when we do regression with 10 parameters, sometimes 10,000 parameters. It depends on the particular case just for visualization and pedagogical introduction. We are looking at this 2 details.
Zeljko Ivezic: So you have now this function. You know how to compute it. You can plot it.
Zeljko Ivezic: and to find the best fit parameters we have to find the peak of that distribution that is the darkest
Zeljko Ivezic: when we do model comparison, then what we do is we integrate this distribution over one.
Zeljko Ivezic: 2, or when there are many donations, as many as over the maintenance. So
Zeljko Ivezic: the bottom line is, we have a multi-dimensional function that we know about the. And then we have to either take derivatives to get the maximum of that function, or we integrate that function to get the probability of the model.
Lovro: I have to interrupt you. We lost your video so we can see you moving, and we can also see only the authentication screen on Jupiter. We can see.
Lovro: for letting me know. Do you see now something we see your cursor moving, but still
Zeljko Ivezic: no video from your camera. And still the authentication screen on. Okay, let me try to re-share.
Zeljko Ivezic: Is this better? Now
Lovro: again, so token authentication is enabled is the only thing that we can see. Maybe you are in the wrong tab. Maybe you want to show a different stuff. I mean the wrong tab. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's the problem.
Zeljko Ivezic: Hang on a second
Zeljko Ivezic: ugly face.
Zeljko Ivezic: How is it now? Yes, this is better. Okay. Do you see? Lecture 5. Yes.
Zeljko Ivezic: Okay. I've been talking to this picture so far.
Lovro: Now I can do with you
Zeljko Ivezic: one way to do what we want to do is to have a sample.
Zeljko Ivezic: It looks like it was drawn from this distribution. Imagine that I can generate now 1 million data points
Zeljko Ivezic: that follow this distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: In that case I can simply take the mean of the distribution to get the expectation back.
Zeljko Ivezic: So I don't have to do the if I want to integrate over a given
Zeljko Ivezic: direction. Even given dimension, I can simply add up all this data.
Zeljko Ivezic: So if I had a tool that will give me a sample drone from this distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: Then I'm in business that I'm good.
Zeljko Ivezic: Now. In one dimension we already did something similar when we had examples with Gaussian distribution. We just call from side by side to where we call for given distribution. You say, give me a sample of endpoints. We did that multiple times
Zeljko Ivezic: in one dimension. It's very easy.
Zeljko Ivezic: but it doesn't generalize to many challenges.
Zeljko Ivezic: and that's where this
Zeljko Ivezic: now some of you might have encountered regression or fitting of multi-dimensional conference in your other world
Zeljko Ivezic: in particular, in numerical recipes, there is a nice description of the most popular methods for lavender markup methods.
Zeljko Ivezic: so that method.
Zeljko Ivezic: If you give it function like this, it will
Zeljko Ivezic: go towards the steepest direction, and it will end up at the peak. If you think of this as the amount of it. I think 7 about Zaccha. Maybe it will be more precise. It will know how to sign to the P.
Zeljko Ivezic: But in this case it level by mark. But method, that similar methods, the only results that you get at the end is the position.
Zeljko Ivezic: It will tell you that on method. It's a the fast point is still.
Zeljko Ivezic: but it will not tell you nothing about the shape of my, but it doesn't remember how it came that we could record it. But it doesn't send on the whole mountain. It just looks very the big there. Let me go straight it.
Zeljko Ivezic: But what we really want to know is a simple
Zeljko Ivezic: for the entire mountain. So then, later I can quantify the shape of that. That's the point of Markov chain, Monte Carlo.
Zeljko Ivezic: So
Zeljko Ivezic: to be more quantitative. We have this function
Zeljko Ivezic: that they talked about before
Zeljko Ivezic: here. So we end up with posterior probability distribution. So they have likelihood given some data
Zeljko Ivezic: that we supposedly know how to write. And then we have function of many parameters.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so let's now call that posterior probability distribution. So that's the formula I wanted to show. So I will just call P of theta is the whole posterior.
Zeljko Ivezic: I have this function. I know how to compute it. All the problems that we will have then in Bayesian analysis is given by this formula. So there is integral over multi-parameter space.
Zeljko Ivezic: and we have some function. G. That will be multiplying the stereo. And so in some cases.
Zeljko Ivezic: G is simple. It's one. So, for example, if you marginalize over all the uninteresting parameters, then G of theta is simply one, but the integral goes over only those so called nuisance.
Zeljko Ivezic: If you want to get expectation
Zeljko Ivezic: for your parameter, then G of Theta becomes state up, some given of many. You take theta, and and then you again integrate it.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that's what we wanted. and Monte Carlo methods by themselves.
Zeljko Ivezic: or nothing to do with by as the and statistic they are. These are just about that that you probably had in some classes.
Zeljko Ivezic: Even when I was so then, you know, like many years ago, we had numerical
Zeljko Ivezic: mathematics, and in particular you learn many ways of doing the medical integration. This here at this formula.
Zeljko Ivezic: It's the standard.
Zeljko Ivezic: The approximation of function is a step function. And then it's integration, nothing more than that.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so in this case. you would just take a rate you want to create
Zeljko Ivezic: and do integration.
Zeljko Ivezic: But if your function is varying widely.
Zeljko Ivezic: like it goes from 10 to the minus 10 value to one.
Zeljko Ivezic: You have huge dynamic range, and if you sample the parameter space uniformly, then most of your points, most of your computation will be wasted
Zeljko Ivezic: on those uninteresting places where your probabilities 10 to the minus 10.
Zeljko Ivezic: So what you want to do is to generate points where it's interesting where the probability distribution is fine.
Zeljko Ivezic: So basically, your points have to follow the probability distribution itself. That's the problem that we want to solve. So let me let me then go to the beginning.
Zeljko Ivezic: So there is little bit of if, after the lecture, you will want to go deeper than all the
Zeljko Ivezic: there are some excellent references here in particular is one by Tom Vk and C. And C. Something for damage is a very good end. People
Zeljko Ivezic: now, he didn't mean that you're all stupid, but there is a whole series of books for this for them instead. But that means booking for dialing program for that. So he called his book for done. It's very good.
Zeljko Ivezic: and the lecture itself has many words in the beginning that I put in intentionally. So later, when you go, you can read carefully and slowly when you revisit the lecture. But the the what we want to cover in class is few practical examples that will illustrate the power of Mcmc.
Zeljko Ivezic: So before we go there.
Zeljko Ivezic: there is this plot of
Zeljko Ivezic: code installation. I again apologize that I didn't realize I uploaded lecture complex. But when you go home. Then you find time. Try to run this notebook. Try to install this software. I, M. C. 3, and if you are successful you'll have an awfully powerful
Zeljko Ivezic: to in your tool box, and you'll have examples. You'll see later today how to use that to to do multi-dimensional regression and to get the stereo probability distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: so I will not
Zeljko Ivezic: re execute this. It worked this morning, but it takes few minutes to to install it, so I skipped it.
Zeljko Ivezic: So what this blot does is just to do the same. Basically, it solves this problem.
Zeljko Ivezic: So we have this two-dimensional distribution. So it's a go with with me and Sigma. This block of code actually generates a sample that looks like it was drawn from the distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: and so I will skip it, for now we will come back to it. you'll go just through some intro to Emc. okay, this was for some students from a different country who don't know where Monte Carlo is
Zeljko Ivezic: from a country that they don't learn much geography.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that's the picture of Monte Carlo. It's fun place I was once there. It's one.
Zeljko Ivezic: So let's now go back to this. I will not go into gory details.
Zeljko Ivezic: but we will show
Zeljko Ivezic: just the basics. So as a reminder
Zeljko Ivezic: from those introductory numerical classes.
Zeljko Ivezic: This example shows how to determine the value of 5
Zeljko Ivezic: using
Zeljko Ivezic: numerics. So we know that area of circle is 500 square. So the area of
Zeljko Ivezic: one quarter of a circle is one quarter of 5 r. Squared. And this square is one by one.
Zeljko Ivezic: Okay, I didn't emphasize another important detail. So in the development of these 2 Monte Carlo.
Zeljko Ivezic: We are assuming that we have a 2 to random number generally, so which basically everything expands.
Zeljko Ivezic: and that random number generator will give you random numbers between 0 and one that are uniformly distributed.
Zeljko Ivezic: Now you can ask, how can set the realistic machine like a computer, generate random numbers.
Zeljko Ivezic: and indeed they are not random, they are so the random, and there is a whole sign as we. Finally.
Zeljko Ivezic: if you're interested in more details again, I I recommend numerical Recipes book. There is a beautiful chapter on pseudo random numbers
Zeljko Ivezic: for our purpose. We'll just assume by magic we call that function, and we get number between 0 and one uniformly distributed between those limits. And then, given that tool.
Zeljko Ivezic: we want to be able to go to multi-dimensional spaces and generate distribution of numbers of points in that multi dimensional case that follow some prescribed distribution that follow our posterior.
Zeljko Ivezic: Once you have that tool, then all the further analysis. he's simply looking at various. He's on the grounds.
Zeljko Ivezic: So in this little piece of code, what happens is. I go 4 times. I drove 100.1,000 points, 10,000, 100,000, and they say, give me 2 numbers
Zeljko Ivezic: X and Y,
Zeljko Ivezic: and that's my random number generate. So it generates a number between 0 and one from uniform distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then I say, radio square is expert plus y squared.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then I say, my numerical estimate of 5 is 4 times because I'm looking at quarter of a circle, and I say, give me only points
Zeljko Ivezic: where our square is less than one. I'm selecting the red part of the
Zeljko Ivezic: out of end points that also include blue points. I reject
Zeljko Ivezic: blue points. I key red points. And I ask what fraction of points I selected.
Zeljko Ivezic: and that's my estimate of fine, and then I do it 4 times, and somewhere here I calculate error in that estimate for illustration. Of course we know what the spy, but just to show how it scales with the number of points. So if you have 100 points and you do this naive numerical integration.
Zeljko Ivezic: Then you get 4. If you go all the way to 100,000 points, then your precision is point 2, and so the more points you have the more precise result. This.
Zeljko Ivezic: that's for sampling uniform.
Zeljko Ivezic: So I basically lost like one quarter of sample to bull points.
Zeljko Ivezic: I spent my computing time for nothing, because I rejected those points.
Zeljko Ivezic: If somehow I knew how to generate distribution that was more closely resembling the red points, then I would not have basic points. And that's one of the ideas behind
Zeljko Ivezic: Markov chain, Monte Carlo.
Zeljko Ivezic: So what is Markov chain? Again? I don't want to go too deep into theory. But Markov chain is defined as a set of numbers. Chain is basically array of numbers
Zeljko Ivezic: where the probability of drawing the next value in that change depends only on the value of the preceding immediately preceding number, not the entire set.
Zeljko Ivezic: So if I have 100 numbers, that I, through somehow, according to some distribution 100 first number will depend only on the last number.
Zeljko Ivezic: So as I go around.
Zeljko Ivezic: and then where I'm going next
Zeljko Ivezic: will be in the neighborhood of Parli. It will depend only where I am now. The only input is my current position.
Zeljko Ivezic: and by doing this.
Zeljko Ivezic: then we can do much more efficient integration.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so this formula here basically summarizes the whole of that method. So it looks very similar. So look at this formula. So now I'll scroll back to the previous one we introduced that we know from kindergarten this one.
Zeljko Ivezic: So it looks hopefully similar.
Zeljko Ivezic: The one difference is this delta. That's the way of the step. and then we have some from J one to N.
Zeljko Ivezic: It looks awfully similar, like the other formula. The big difference is that here
Zeljko Ivezic: these are space uniformly on some red in the other formula, the implication is
Zeljko Ivezic: there we go here. The implication is that these points are
Zeljko Ivezic: sampled proportionally to the distribution itself.
Zeljko Ivezic: and so then we can just simply add them. And this way it is much more efficient, much smaller fraction of points is waste.
Zeljko Ivezic: So the next question is, how do you generate this points? Once you start
Zeljko Ivezic: from some value, how do you get the next value? And
Zeljko Ivezic: basically.
Zeljko Ivezic: this is very similar to atomic physics. If you ever heard of detailed balance patient when you do a vision of what comes from
Zeljko Ivezic: from your physicists, if not, then let's just dwell a little bit on this. This is like 2 state examples. So instead of having continuous possibilities
Zeljko Ivezic: of real numbers, given the some very probability distribution, let's simplify as much as we can, and the simplest possible value is State A and State B.
Zeljko Ivezic: And let's say that State A is more probable than State P. And now I'm drawing random numbers between 0 and one. I know what's the ratio of.
Zeljko Ivezic: and I want to end up
Zeljko Ivezic: with more values that let's say, from 0 to 0 point 5. We call A from point 5 to one before V.
Zeljko Ivezic: And if I now throw random numbers, I'll end up with the same height of these 2,
Zeljko Ivezic: because it's just symmetric. But actually, I want to have this asymmetric distribution. So when I call random number.
Zeljko Ivezic: if it's below 0 point 5. It's a
Zeljko Ivezic: and I'm happy because I do need to make a bigger. But if I draw a point 5 to one that would be me.
Zeljko Ivezic: I don't hold all of those to go to the, because then I'll end up in cementing distribution. I want that recipe that when I draw a number between point 5 and one. I want some recipe that will allow me to reject
Zeljko Ivezic: occasionally that proposal that that goes into Bill B. Instead, I assign it to being a
Zeljko Ivezic: and if I know how to do that. then at the end I'll have this ratio.
Zeljko Ivezic: So the idea is that if I am in
Zeljko Ivezic: a
Zeljko Ivezic: and now, if I go to B, it will be proportional to the probability of being into A in the first place, and then there is some transition probability
Zeljko Ivezic: probability that I would go to be.
Zeljko Ivezic: If I know that I'm in state A, that's my previous step. The
Zeljko Ivezic: if I'm in state, B, then probability that I will go to A is the original probability of being instead B times some probability that I would actually decide to switch to A,
Zeljko Ivezic: so it's like 2 by 2. I have 2 initial possibilities and 2 ending possibilities.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so then there is something called detailed balance situation.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so we've said that rates, these twoing. This is rate, and this is rate to go from A to B. These 2 rates have to be equal. Eventually I have to achieve equilibrium.
Zeljko Ivezic: and if those transition probabilities are set right.
Zeljko Ivezic: then, after I draw many thousands of numbers, it will be exactly the ratio of P of A towards B.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so I can write now this equation that I got from the above.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so now I just simply by simple algebra, I can say this transition to be from A has to be
Zeljko Ivezic: like T from A to B with the ratio of 2 probabilities. So it's asymmetric, because typically this ratio is
Zeljko Ivezic: different than what.
Zeljko Ivezic: and then I have freedom to set this transition probability to anything. And so if I said this to one for simplicity, then this is my recipe.
Zeljko Ivezic: So if I am transition probability from B to A
Zeljko Ivezic: has to be set to the ratio, this this is number smaller than one.
Zeljko Ivezic: So again, now I'm either in A or B, I draw a random number. If it's less than point 5, it's a proposal is to go to A if it's between point 5 and one proposal is to go to B.
Zeljko Ivezic: So if I am in this state, then I'll accept. If it says, Go to A,
Zeljko Ivezic: if it says, go to B, then I'll only accept. if
Zeljko Ivezic: with this probability. So if this ratio is, say, 0 point 5, if P. Of a twice as large as the of B, then every time when I would otherwise say, Go to B, I will say No, let's draw random number, and if that new number is
Zeljko Ivezic: below this probability, then I will accept it. If it's about, I will reject it.
Zeljko Ivezic: And this way, in the beginning it will not be exactly the distribution we want. but eventually it will saturate. So I have numerical example.
Zeljko Ivezic: This one. Okay, so this was the simplest possible case of 2 states.
Zeljko Ivezic: A more interesting case is like, if you have 10 States, because it's like 10 digits.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so then let me first show results, and then we go to the.
Zeljko Ivezic: So this blue distribution. It's my desired distribution, so I can draw 10 digits. They have same probability. If I just record them. After a while my distribution will be uniform.
Zeljko Ivezic: but I don't want it to be uniform. I want it to look like blue line. So, for example, if I get Number 7, this number is suppressed in my blue distribution, so whenever I draw 7, I want to reject it and reassign
Zeljko Ivezic: to some other number. According to this probability, distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: and the red is after we do did that for
Zeljko Ivezic: 10 iterations.
Zeljko Ivezic: But then, as I increase the number of iteration, I will be getting closer and closer to the true distribution. For example, here I drew 10,000 numbers.
Zeljko Ivezic: I reject it. You'll see in a moment why rejected? 4,400, the remaining 6,000, and roughly, 600 is the red distribution. Now it looks
Zeljko Ivezic: almost exactly like what I wanted to have.
Zeljko Ivezic: So the magic is to go from uniform distribution to whatever distribution I design. In this case, we have 10 discrete states
Zeljko Ivezic: in real problems, we can have real numbers. We can have infinite number of states, and we can have many dimensions instead of one.
Zeljko Ivezic: So what that? What the code does is
Zeljko Ivezic: so this is simple.
Zeljko Ivezic: So we have states. This is where I want to. Now, this is the initial space. Okay.
Zeljko Ivezic: I go through arbitrary number of iterations. Okay, here is where I get where I get my random number between 0 and 10, I get my random digit 0 and 9. Sorry.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then
Zeljko Ivezic: I have this formula that we just derived that we accept this state with this probability?
Zeljko Ivezic: No, if it's less than that, we accept, if it's higher than that, we reject it.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then, if it's rejected, then we take the prior value. So like, if you were in A and we rejected transition to B. We stay where we were.
Zeljko Ivezic: and then you go, and you go next number and next number, and then you follow this probability. Now, where did I?
Zeljko Ivezic: Where did I define the initial
Zeljko Ivezic: hang on a second? I confuse myself. Oh, here! So here, now I can define the any probabilities I want. This is what it defines the blue curve. So if it was uniform, all of them would be point 1.
Zeljko Ivezic: Some of them are smaller, some of them are larger.
Zeljko Ivezic: That's my targets distribution. And then I draw numbers. And by using that simple, detailed balance rule I can end up with desired distribution, but I have to do it many times. That's the point of the exercise. So here. I didn't have enough dros on my 10. It's not very close. And then, when I call this code again, the 10,000 numbers, then eventually, with this rejection recipe I ended up with desired distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: So this is simple example. In one D with 10 States, we will. But in practice we already have software tools that can work in much more complicated settings.
Zeljko Ivezic: The the one, the original algorithm, is called metropolis fast things. So there there were 2 people who worked at for Salamas
Zeljko Ivezic: laboratory immediately after Second World War on nuclear weapons research.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so when they developed this, they had some of the first computers to work with. So they developed this numerical integration.
Zeljko Ivezic: And because it was secret work, they called it Monte Carlo.
Zeljko Ivezic: because it was just code name for it. It is basically gambling and then rejecting and accepting values that gave the name to Monte Carlo integration.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then Markov chain is a different concept from that. So together it became my Markov chain, Monte Carlo. So this example here
Zeljko Ivezic: will be drawing. We'll be drawing from one dimensional distribution, and we want to get mute. So this is 3 well, example that we can solve analytically. but it shows the idea of the whole process.
Zeljko Ivezic: So in this block we defined our likelihood in this case it's extremely simple. Later you'll see more complicated example.
Zeljko Ivezic: We define our prior. So it's X. It's one dimensional case.
Zeljko Ivezic: and my posterior is likelihood times prior.
Zeljko Ivezic: So in this case, likelihood and prior a simple, but it is always likelihood times prior, and it can be as many dimensions as you want.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then what we do is
Zeljko Ivezic: we generate we. So this would be real data. But we actually had simulated data. We choose parameters of a Gaussian and generate 100 data points. These are our data points. And what we want to find out is what is new.
Zeljko Ivezic: Of course, you know analytic formula. You add them up, divided by N, and you get your best estimate of me. That's trivial.
Zeljko Ivezic: But example shows how it works in Icmc, basically, you calculate posterior by combining likelihood. And here I are on that grid of you.
Zeljko Ivezic: and then you get the stereo normalization.
Zeljko Ivezic: You normalize it to integrate to one. And this is what you get out. So this is your data. And out of that likelihood. And, prior, you get your posterior distribution for you. There's the same function as we introduce before analytically, it's basically the mean value of your data. And the with is Sigma over square root of N,
Zeljko Ivezic: so we reproduced analytic result just by doing numerical sampling and computing posterior.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that's trivial example. I will skip this details, and I will go to a real example. This is to test the code.
Zeljko Ivezic: You can read it later.
Zeljko Ivezic: All right. So this is first real example. There is this function. This comes from a real paper that some time it will not some time, 20 years ago, got them all.
Zeljko Ivezic: So 20 years ago, we had this interesting paper that showed this
Zeljko Ivezic: function, and that was in the context of looking at asteroids, we had new measurements of the color of asteroids, which is basically reflecting of the surface. and disaster is below to families, so they are believed to be remnants of larger asteroids that were in collisions broken into smaller pieces.
Zeljko Ivezic: And now, after it can have different colors because they're made of different materials, just like rocks on Earth. Sometimes you have white rocks like rocks, brainite, etc. And so, depending on chemical composition, they have their unique colors. But then they discovered interesting, interesting effects, that even when you have a given chemical composition of asteroid that color changes with time, and now time is many millions of years, hundreds of millions of you.
Zeljko Ivezic: It's something like a venue. Slice apple into pieces
Zeljko Ivezic: and leave it on a plate. 1 h later. All the pieces of brown, because of oxidation here is similar, except in the process, is not oxidation is the impact of solar event on the surface of faster it. The changes their reflectivity profits. So that's the physics behind it. It's not important. This could be something from biology, from chemistry doesn't matter. The point is
Zeljko Ivezic: that we have 2 dimensional problem. We measure Y versus X,
Zeljko Ivezic: and these are our data points. And we believe that we know what kind of function we need to fit. And that was the function here.
Zeljko Ivezic: Now, this function is a nonlinear function in parameters C and D, so X is independent, variable Y, and they are
Zeljko Ivezic: from those data. We want to set this function and determine A and B and C and D,
Zeljko Ivezic: and not just determine them. But we also want to know their uncertainties, and how they are covariant with the general I could easily apply
Zeljko Ivezic: it would give me the best interviews. It would even give me uncertainties, those but those uncertainties would be only Gaussian approximation.
Zeljko Ivezic: and it will give me covariances between these parameters. What I really want to do in this by Asian economics is to show most stereo probability distribution for those whole parameters.
Zeljko Ivezic: And the this function, it's not trivial because it's nonlinear in C and B, it's linear in A and B, what does that mean? That means when you take the derivative. With respect to A
Zeljko Ivezic: in the result, there is no motivation.
Zeljko Ivezic: If you take a there is no.
Zeljko Ivezic: but if you take derivative with respect to C, or they, they will still be that it is not that it is nonlinear function of C and D,
Zeljko Ivezic: and so we want now to solve these numerically using these modern tools.
Zeljko Ivezic: So the problem that we have is, we are given these red points, and we want to get this blue line.
Zeljko Ivezic: This blue line is actually from that paper that was published.
Zeljko Ivezic: And the data points are identical. And now we will use Mcmc to call by and C. 3.
Zeljko Ivezic: And there is one plotting routine in asthma that was designed to make what's look prettier and defaulted by and C. 3. So that's what we will do. So we will show example of how to leak that
Zeljko Ivezic: a nonlinear function with many
Zeljko Ivezic: later. If you have some other function in your board, you can use exactly the same code with minor modifications and try to do it in your own context. So we read earlier. So there is some data that or actually, it's put in by hand. That's the data.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then in this block. I basically renamed it so to make it even more transparent that we have X axis where we have observed value and uncertainty, and we have y. X's. And it's uncertain. So there are many problems we can come up with that have exactly the same structure.
Zeljko Ivezic: And here is the recipe. How to then solve the problem in 5, 6, 3 is not the only such tool.
Zeljko Ivezic: They are at least half of those, and tools that do similar things have similar properties, speed, robustness, and so on. So it's not the only choice, but
Zeljko Ivezic: I ended up using this one.
Zeljko Ivezic: So this one is called Mcmc after it. So it's specific to our asteroids. And it's specific because we have to define that function that we fit in here.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that function has 4,
Zeljko Ivezic: 3 parameters. And we need to specify.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so there are some ranges. We say we don't know much about these parameters. Let's take uniform distribution. And then, by looking at at
Zeljko Ivezic: at a behavior of data, we can come up with this possible prior. For example, A is point between point one and point 5. If you look at
Zeljko Ivezic: at the formula.
Zeljko Ivezic: A is just standing here alone and shifting the whole thing up and down.
Zeljko Ivezic: That gives the range for why? And if you look at the data. Then you know that that shift has to be somewhere in this range.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that's the when you go to the left to infinity, the blue line becomes flat.
Zeljko Ivezic: It happens to be point 33 or something. In this case we put a limit from point one to point 5. So we definitely bracket what we expect.
Zeljko Ivezic: and by similar reasoning you can put these other numbers in. and then
Zeljko Ivezic: this is important
Zeljko Ivezic: step. If you have errors on X-axis. Sometimes, often
Zeljko Ivezic: people have regression where your measurement from Y axis has uncertainties, but you control X. X is quite well like, for example, if you fit something as a function of time in the laboratory. You can have time measured with millisecond precision. But what you measure some bacteria growth, or some chemical growth or brightness of a star, that all has errors that can be many percent or or even larger.
Zeljko Ivezic: If you do have errors on X-axis, then you have to generate so called latent variables. You have to generate underlying distribution from which you think you through your measurement. So if you have measurement, error, you imagine there is true value, but what you measure is distributed as a Gaussian around it true value. And so in this case, that's the magic line
Zeljko Ivezic: where we draw a value of latent variable from that underlying Gaussian distribution. If we believe uncertainties are Gauss.
Zeljko Ivezic: Now, if there are no errors, then we basically just take the measured values we assume our errors are 0, and we just assigned this X latent to be
Zeljko Ivezic: observed value.
Zeljko Ivezic: And this is where magic happens. This is workforce.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that that's the board. No, I'm like this is not work yet. Here we define what is, why. so we believe? Why is also drone from Gaussian distribution given with errors. Why, here
Zeljko Ivezic: and mu. The mean value is that blue line?
Zeljko Ivezic: So this is the equation that is specific to this case. This is very specified our function, and now we have to tell it. This is how we generate expectation value. If you had some different function.
Zeljko Ivezic: then you would.
Zeljko Ivezic: So here it is, you would put some different function in here. So the only specific thing to the asteroid problem in the whole setup
Zeljko Ivezic: is this function
Zeljko Ivezic: here. That's what we fit. and then, if you have the 4 parameters here, you have to specified price, and that's it.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then the magic happens here. So you say to pi and C 3, sample this
Zeljko Ivezic: and give me traces and traces, is the name for the space, so it will generate values
Zeljko Ivezic: of this Abcd by sampling that likelihood.
Zeljko Ivezic: and at the end
Zeljko Ivezic: you will have a chain of numbers that then you can look at. Distribution of. You can get mean value. You can look at a bit of the distribution, etc.
Zeljko Ivezic: So this is where it's now executed.
Zeljko Ivezic: and then Pi and C 3 also gives you various other tools to display a link. and so summary in particular, can show you for those traces. Where is the mean value itself?
Zeljko Ivezic: I'm not going to execute this. So once you install this software phone, try to execute this. So it takes about 3 to 5 min on my computer. It may vary with your computer, but make sure you can run it, and if you can run it, then you're in business.
Zeljko Ivezic: So it runs for 5 min. and then I have my crisis. and then I can investigate. So the first thing I wanted to look at is how good is the best fit. So I take these values.
Zeljko Ivezic: So this is best fit. Where did I set it? Here is best fit. So I say, take this traces. give me the mean value of those traces that is my best fit parameter.
Zeljko Ivezic: And now this array holds those values.
Zeljko Ivezic: and so best fit of a B of C of D. These are now the 4 numbers that I know
Zeljko Ivezic: I could have gotten these numbers from Lebanon Markford methods. So so far we didn't see yet anything about change. This is simply the best fit, and the best fit is green.
Zeljko Ivezic: And now you can ask, what is green different from blue? Blue is published paper.
Zeljko Ivezic: and we did the same data, and
Zeljko Ivezic: we get different results. What do you think?
Zeljko Ivezic: But
Zeljko Ivezic: what was that? A little
Zeljko Ivezic: of 5? Right? Yeah. So we what's prior to him? So this line here
Zeljko Ivezic: specified some ranges for price. There's the only thing that is potentially different than
Zeljko Ivezic: in the published paper. and
Zeljko Ivezic: 20 years ago we were not smart enough to we port what price we use for the. So I'm guessing it's because of Prior. But
Zeljko Ivezic: the paper is all published, and we really don't know why it's different. Fortunately the difference is small. You would expect that they are identical, but they are not
Zeljko Ivezic: so. Now what's happened with the code? So now there is this trace plot. This is the fault tool in by M. C. 3. You can ask for this traces. It's pretty ugly.
Zeljko Ivezic: I don't know. Usually it's not the tag. I don't know what happened. It's just a black box that you call the point of
Zeljko Ivezic: this on the right hand side, is. It shows you how these numbers vary. As you go through this mark of training. Again, you have one number up to that point, and then you generate using those rules.
Zeljko Ivezic: those detailed balance rules to generate new number in that multi-dimensional 4 dimensional space to follow at the end the distribution that we put in. But if you remember that example, with 10 digits when we hit small number of points
Zeljko Ivezic: we did not get there, it just didn't try enough times to converge to the final distribution only when we get like 10,000 points it was pretty much identical. So there is this beginning of the process of forming chain that is not in equilibrium. Physicists would say, it's not in terms of the
Zeljko Ivezic: so that piece is called burn in burial, and they usually throw this out.
Zeljko Ivezic: and this one of parameters that you have sometimes to specify by hand, and there is no
Zeljko Ivezic: straight through how to do it. From first principle. You need to have this chain to converge. So in practice there are some rules where people look for convergence speed, and once, when they don't see much change in the behavior of the chain. Then they say, Okay, now, instead of state, I can throw the beginning.
Zeljko Ivezic: that burning, and the rest of my data points us believe to be instead the same. And then the more precision you want in quantifying Pdf. At the end, the more you don't run it.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so that's this change. Now look
Zeljko Ivezic: very stable. So they, as they go from left to right, they don't change much in appearance.
Zeljko Ivezic: Now, that's not what always happens. So let me now have digression and go back to to this example.
Zeljko Ivezic: There is also a parameter that specifies
Zeljko Ivezic: how much it will jump from one place to the other that is adjustable, and if that parameter is not right, then your chain will not look
Zeljko Ivezic: like it's steady. So this is now we are visualization.
Zeljko Ivezic: But here you can see in this case how this goes up and down, and if you look at the oscillation amplitude, it's much smaller than the actual shift.
Zeljko Ivezic: So this chain that is not in equilibrium. Yet
Zeljko Ivezic: basically, the the step is too small and it cannot. So basically it wouldn't go over the entire, it would get stuck in and just go between 2 houses.
Zeljko Ivezic: In this case this is one too large. And so here it's also not in steady state.
Zeljko Ivezic: But there are these huge changes from 1 point to the other. That would be like if you're going around and every step magically, you move by 100 kilometers. So all of a sudden, you end up in 3 min and see that you're not the maintenance anymore. So you have to have a step that is comparable to the size of that mountain.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so this one is just right, and you can see how now, as you go from left to right, it oscillates, and it appears to be steady state oscillation around some values.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that's what can happen in practice. That's why we always need to look at change. Here is another visualization with this code where it shows stability of the chain.
Zeljko Ivezic: So, going back to our example, this is what we got from that
Zeljko Ivezic: default plotter. It's not very nice.
Zeljko Ivezic: pretty, but it tells you about change. There is a better tool called Plot and Cmc. From
Zeljko Ivezic: where we beautified it a bit. And basically, the input is traces.
Zeljko Ivezic: So what I got from 5 c. 3, I got this series of of quadruplates of numbers that goes forever, not forever, but many of them.
Zeljko Ivezic: And now I say, I have 4 variables. Show me the distribution and also give it through values.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so these true values are marked by these lines
Zeljko Ivezic: and the 4
Zeljko Ivezic: variables here. So in the bottom row there is one of them here at D, and then there is d versus a d versus C. So it is 4 dimensional distribution that is not easy to visualize.
Zeljko Ivezic: So what we are doing is we are just showing 2 dimensional projections.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so there are these 3 combinations, then can be see. There is a say, C versus B, and finally, there is a say.
Zeljko Ivezic: sometimes people also get histograms of individual ones. That's the next example. This one comes from us through Ml, and it shows contours
Zeljko Ivezic: for the posterior probability distribution. So if you ran.
Zeljko Ivezic: levend, mark that method, it would tell you, where is the maximum? There is maximum in here, for there is maximum in here, but then it would assume that the shape of all these contours is Gaussian.
Zeljko Ivezic: Obviously it's not.
Zeljko Ivezic: and that's the advantage of Mark Markov chain, Monte Carlo, that when we are not in the Gaussian limit when we don't have huge amounts of data points that it can show you what is degenerate. But in particular we can see now, degeneracy between A and D, so as A is bigger than it D is bigger and departing from the true values.
Zeljko Ivezic: so this, through values in some cases are within 2 Sigma controllers. In some other cases they are
Zeljko Ivezic: even going to what's 3 sigma? So it's not very large sample of points. If now I had 10 times bigger sample or 100 times bigger sample, then all these contours would shrink to something that would look like little ellipse is like little Gaussians. In that case, then, we can go back to Levember markers. But this is more powerful because it can show you the true posterior probability distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: And there is another visualization. Sure.
Zeljko Ivezic:  so you can see that we discuss this idea. You're not the first one who thought, I can see. Now I have a studio. So now I'm fine.
Zeljko Ivezic: but it's easy to understand why they don't put that in one dimensional face, so you can have Prior. That is flat
Zeljko Ivezic: your report, and then you have like it for this Gaussian. You might put like a 2, and then you get Gaussian for posterior.
Zeljko Ivezic: Now you say? Oh, I
Zeljko Ivezic: and you put this Gaussian for Prior. Now you have to say that. Was it for possible? You multiply that you get something there, do it again. You get something there, or at the end you get out of the function.
Zeljko Ivezic: So the process of multiplying prior, like what you can do only once.
Zeljko Ivezic: That's what comes from probability period. Once you do this, then you cannot go back. You need to have more data or some other information
Zeljko Ivezic: here. It's slightly harder to visualize this in your head. But it's exactly the same problem problem. You have to take these contours. You can feed it as a prior rerun anything.
Zeljko Ivezic: And these controls for training, and next time they would drink in the end I would have delta functions in that.
Zeljko Ivezic: Yes.
Zeljko Ivezic: something like that. Because
Zeljko Ivezic: if you are.
Zeljko Ivezic: you can compare the serial prior and see if the close, which means your data didn't tell you much.
Zeljko Ivezic: even if the data are not paying, and you are very concerned about what is the price of private and then change prior to you in. In later third lecture we talked about how we set tiles.
Zeljko Ivezic: so you can have
Zeljko Ivezic: good questions, good questions.
Zeljko Ivezic: This is another python distribution. You can say it installed corner, and you get the code. It does exactly the same job.
Zeljko Ivezic: It's more popular than. and it
Zeljko Ivezic: shows basically the same information, but slightly different visualization.
Zeljko Ivezic: And in particular it shows marginal distributions of A, B, C, and D,
Zeljko Ivezic: so that means you forget about the other variables you integrate over them. And this is what I think of that parameter
Zeljko Ivezic: in posterior distribution with doubt respect to any other one. This can be like in this function. Let's say we were only interested in the beginning of that call, or which then change is the time. So the only number I interested for physical reasons, is a and the rest I don't really care.
Zeljko Ivezic: And so in this case I would only look at this distribution of a it gives me in this here we know the
Zeljko Ivezic: Do we know the truth? No, this is, yeah, it's not really true. It's from the paper. So blue line is from the paper. And this is posterior that we got using this
Zeljko Ivezic: again.
Zeljko Ivezic: This shows the power of generating sample. So from M. C. And C, because here for marginal distributions. we are really not integrating, integrating anything explicitly. Yeah, just floating histogram of A, so I have quadruplex of numbers.
Zeljko Ivezic: and the marginal distribution of A is simply histogram of A.
Zeljko Ivezic: If I want to know covariance between, say D and A.
Zeljko Ivezic: Then I simply plot D and A as a distribution in this two-dimensional space I projected.
Zeljko Ivezic: That's the beauty of having a sample of points in that multi-dimensional space that resembles the posterior probability distribution. So that's the key. That's why I'm C and C is powerful
Zeljko Ivezic: because we have a whole distribution as opposed to just the peak and the Gaussian approximation. So you don't get just and location of them, and you get whole magnets of when you run in. Cmc.
Zeljko Ivezic: so let's now look at another example
Zeljko Ivezic: like, if you took this class 5 years ago, you could have received Nobel Prize for discovering his slightly too late, but at least you can do what they did. So they measured
Zeljko Ivezic: energy of particles, and
Zeljko Ivezic: they knew that there were some particles like Z. Something they were suspecting. There is another article somewhere there, and indeed there was signal. So the black points are data.
Zeljko Ivezic: There was signal around 120 something geev. 125, which turned out to be that 6 boson regards particle, etc. They did get Nobel Prize for that.
Zeljko Ivezic: Our problem here is, if you are given data like this like points. how do we search for peaks? How do we find
Zeljko Ivezic: evidence for those peaks, and how do we quantify whether these are real or not like. For example, if you look at between 140 and 150 Gv. These 3 points.
Zeljko Ivezic: If you are optimistic, you could say, but there is another peak. Maybe there is another Nobel Prize waiting for you there. So how did we know this is not real, and this is real. Again, we just
Zeljko Ivezic: follow by by Bayesian prescription, and we fit some function. Now, in this case we need to know shape of that function.
Zeljko Ivezic: and next time we learn how to interpret this, even without specifying any arbitrary shape, completely parameters. But today.
Zeljko Ivezic: for this example, we try to
Zeljko Ivezic: to discover these, these bursts of energy. This speaks by assuming their shape is G,
Zeljko Ivezic: so
Zeljko Ivezic: there we go. So we have data.
Zeljko Ivezic: That's the data set, we will try to interpret the data. Points are blue that simulated. And the truth is this red line.
Zeljko Ivezic: So there is one. If if you think of this energy and particles there is some particle at 40 something.
Zeljko Ivezic: Or if you think of this as time series, there was burst of energy at 40 s, or you can think of other physical examples. It's all the same man.
Zeljko Ivezic: So in particular, it was generated as Gaussian profile on top of a flat background noise.
Zeljko Ivezic: This could also be a star in your image where X is is pixels. And why is the count in each pixel? And it's one dimensional Cross section. It's exactly the same map, exactly the same approach. If you want to detect Star in an astronomical image. Yes.
this is the
Zeljko Ivezic: that's a good question. Let's see what we did.
Zeljko Ivezic: I think it's on purpose. I forget the recipe. So this is Gaussian profile for the background. So this is background.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then there is amplitude of the profile. It's set centered on capital T, as some with Sigma. So we have 1, 2, 3, 4 parameters again
Zeljko Ivezic: and again, it's nonlinear problem. It's linear in V, not an A, but it's nonlinear in T and Sigma.
Zeljko Ivezic: Then we say.
Zeljko Ivezic: Okay, so this random seed, the purpose of that is to have repeatable experiments. So it's pseudo-random number generator. If you tell it, random, see, every time I run this notebook I'll get exactly the same result.
Zeljko Ivezic: 101 points through values. Fine, fine, fine! Then we sort it.
Zeljko Ivezic: There was some background error in why, that's the answer to your question.
Zeljko Ivezic: So just for the
Zeljko Ivezic: for the sake of it. It's not uniform errors. There is some function I even forget now. Why did they took sign?
Zeljko Ivezic: But you can tell that these errors can vary from being very large to being very small around this region. It could be not now, if it was an astronomical image.
Zeljko Ivezic: you subtract the model for the background from that image. So if someone told me that sexual astronomical image, I would say, Oh, there must have been some very bright nebula in the background here, which we subtracted, and because it was bright, then the error so larger because it's square root of end of photons. And here it was dark sky. So these and errors are small.
Zeljko Ivezic: but whatever it is.
Zeljko Ivezic: we do have heteros, fantastic case. So we have varying errors.
Zeljko Ivezic: And now given this blue blue data points. And assuming that we know functional form.
Zeljko Ivezic: we want to determine the values of those 4 parameters.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that's what we show in here and now again another application with
Zeljko Ivezic: 3, and it's now again very similar to asteroid case. The differences are
Zeljko Ivezic: exactly what would you do yourself if you now want to apply this to some other problem that you may be working on.
Zeljko Ivezic: So again, I generate. I generate priors.
Zeljko Ivezic: Now in the fourth line. It says, log sigma is drawn from uniform distribution. You may recall that in Lecture 3 we talked about Jeffrey's priors, that prior for
Zeljko Ivezic: for the parameters that describe scale of something is one over the parameter. Or if you take load, that means that the log of that parameters is distributed uniformly.
Zeljko Ivezic: So B. Not A and T are truly drawn from uniform distribution, but in case of sigma, log of sigma is drawn from uniform distribution, which means that sigma itself is drone from one over sigma distribution.
Zeljko Ivezic: It's a tiny detail
Zeljko Ivezic: it in the limit of large data set. It's completely irrelevant. If you have small data set, then you can see some differences like at the level, like those blue and green lines we saw earlier.
Zeljko Ivezic: So this is now still generating. This is generating why. with that function.
Zeljko Ivezic: And now we use metropolis algorithm to sample and we get our traces. Once you have traces, then you are done with time. Cmc, the rest of it is just visualizing your results. Looking at what you got in interpret
Zeljko Ivezic: again, I'm not going to execute, because it takes a few minutes. and this is yet another code
Zeljko Ivezic: for plotting text things. So this one is in the framework called Candace.
Zeljko Ivezic: That's also something you can easily install. And it's
Zeljko Ivezic: handles, data frames, which is like tables. These are structured data sets that have rows and columns.
Zeljko Ivezic: And then if you download and then you can do operations on those tables, you can easily add Rose, subtract rows at columns. It's like almost like Excel spreadsheet. Yes.
Zeljko Ivezic: if you were unfortunate to
Zeljko Ivezic: so
Zeljko Ivezic: instead of excel spreadsheet you use band us, and you are much more powerful. We can do many more things, and you are not limited to like 10,000 rows, or whatever the silly limit is, we can do
Zeljko Ivezic: billions. If you.
Zeljko Ivezic: So now we are saying, we'll make data frame.
Zeljko Ivezic: So it's traces again. This traces can come from any of those Mcmc tools we use by C. 3. There are other similar tools. They all give you chains of numbers that we call traces. And so you put them
Zeljko Ivezic: loaded in paying the state of friend.
Zeljko Ivezic: and then you can draw things. And so in particular, here there is this integrated image that shows the best fit. and it shows the posterior parameters.
Zeljko Ivezic: So you can see
Zeljko Ivezic: that we found that peak.
Zeljko Ivezic: and that we constrained some parameters quite well, for example. V, not
Zeljko Ivezic: we not is the overall level of the background. That's basically if you go away from this peak, if you just look at this straight line here and here. That value of about 10 is B not.
Zeljko Ivezic: There are many points in here.
Zeljko Ivezic: and there are many points around here, and that constraints be not quite well, so the distribution is quite narrow.
Zeljko Ivezic: But then, if you look at, for example, T. And A.
Zeljko Ivezic: So T. Is the position of the peak 40 something.
Zeljko Ivezic: and then there is amplitude a. And then the last one was Sigma, which is with of this. that's Sigma. So there is degeneracy between Sigma, and A, which is quite large. And most importantly, it does not look like Gaussian at all.
Zeljko Ivezic: So in this particular case you could find the red line
Zeljko Ivezic: by running my member, Marco, but you would not know that there is degeneracy between a and Sigma, and that it's very long Gaussian.
Zeljko Ivezic: So in the limit of
Zeljko Ivezic: of a large errors of small data set. That's that's important.
Zeljko Ivezic: It's also important. If you now try to use your model parameters to predict, say, future behavior.
Zeljko Ivezic: Then, when you say I believe tomorrow my stock price will be in this range.
Zeljko Ivezic: It is fundamentally important also to know uncertainty of your prediction. or say in astronomy. Just recently there was paper from our group
Zeljko Ivezic: observatory requirements that they look at the solar activity. They had a model, and they predicted in the future. How active the sun will be! But crucial thing is not so much to predict the activity just by itself, but to give uncertainty.
Zeljko Ivezic: and if you don't understand uncertainty for your model of parameters, then you don't understand the certainty of your model prediction either. And so the fact that here you have this parts that the total you know, Gaussian, that will influence how well you can predict in the future. And then you can make wrong prediction.
Zeljko Ivezic: Again. We talked about the stock market crash in 2,008. This is very similar to
Zeljko Ivezic: to assuming here Gaussian distributions and then predicting the model behavior in future. While they were these, no 0 probabilities here that
Zeljko Ivezic: in the practice went wrong way.
Zeljko Ivezic: So that's the gist of it. So there is 2. There are many words in the beginning
Zeljko Ivezic: intentionally, because if you really want to to learn, you need to sit down and do it yourself and execute instead, look at the code and think about what it is
Zeljko Ivezic: just looking at. It will not easily get into your head. Trust me.
Zeljko Ivezic: I also had to do that many times until I understood what's going on.
Zeljko Ivezic: So if this is something that you can see yourself using in your research, then to find time to sit down, go through it because this is professional standard. Today, everybody is using Anc for fitting models, for regressing models and to understanding what are posterior probability distributions.
Zeljko Ivezic: Again. Pi, mc. 3 is not the only tool, but it's one of the easiest to learn, so I would encourage you to download it and make it work. And they take one of the examples that we did today, and think of some other example, either from recent you are doing, or if you're not doing research. Just think of some function that you learn in some
Zeljko Ivezic: in some course, and trying to do something else, fit some other function and see how things change
Zeljko Ivezic: or add 10 more parameters, model parameters, and see what happens. Try to break the code.
Zeljko Ivezic: You. You can't break it, but try to push it so that to see what are the problems. And then next time we can talk more, next time we will use Mcmc to do model comparison. We already talked about model comparison
Zeljko Ivezic: we are. We drew numbers from distribution, and we were asking how we rolling numbers from sheet distribution or Gaussian distribution, can we tell?
Zeljko Ivezic: And there was analytic solution, we could tell
Zeljko Ivezic: which one we, the drawing numbers from. So next time you look at the more complicated problem like this burst.
Zeljko Ivezic: That is the plot. We'll have example, that there is strong first like this one and then another one. That speaker.
Zeljko Ivezic: and we'll be asking, is it more probable model that we have just one burst? Or is it more probable that we have 2 first? And that's basically that question that we were asking in case of fix boson is there evidence for new particle or not?
Zeljko Ivezic: And then we'll end up with
Zeljko Ivezic: one method that is no parametric that can be used to integrate data like this that is equivalent to histogram. But it's much, much more powerful than your regular system.
Zeljko Ivezic: So try to look at this. We have.
Zeljko Ivezic: We have
Zeljko Ivezic: almost 2 weeks until the last lecture.
Zeljko Ivezic: and see what could be wrong. This is probably the most powerful tool that we that we encounter in this entire lecture series.
Zeljko Ivezic: So again, I encourage you to try it.
Zeljko Ivezic: I'll stop here and I'm open for questions.
Zeljko Ivezic:  obviously, we alright.
Zeljko Ivezic: It's it's it's really amazing right for you.
Zeljko Ivezic: So first, you made an excellent point that sometimes in functions that we want to.
Zeljko Ivezic: you can redefine or rearrange for, and you can remove the general.
Zeljko Ivezic: and if you can do that, it's always
Zeljko Ivezic: because then all the.
Zeljko Ivezic: But
Zeljko Ivezic: even if you. if you have a relatively small data set that will not really do, Gauss application.
Zeljko Ivezic: then you still
Zeljko Ivezic: gain benefit from this approach, because Levin and Mark, but the tools that your posterior is well inspired by.
Zeljko Ivezic: and if that is not true, and it will not be true, if it is not overwhelmingly large, then it is still benefit.
Yes.
Zeljko Ivezic: How we did invite this for distributed where we have to.
Very nice.
Zeljko Ivezic: Yes, you can. You can do that easily.
Zeljko Ivezic: So where is it here?
Zeljko Ivezic: So what we do here, we say we generate y.
Zeljko Ivezic: and that's why it's function of tea. Blah, blah, blah blah blah!
Zeljko Ivezic: And so here I don't have to have t as a scalar. It can be vector, it can be many other components of that. Vector, this is recipe for how you generate why?
Zeljko Ivezic: And it will just work in this multi-dimensional space. We just give it more numbers.
Zeljko Ivezic: You tell you which of these numbers are viruses that you are trying to determine, and which of them are independent
Zeljko Ivezic: dimensions of your problem. And what's just?
Zeljko Ivezic: Sometimes people run it in 10,000 dimensional space?
Zeljko Ivezic: Probably not the clouds on all right.
Zeljko Ivezic: that it's it's spinning support. having extremely complicated models that predict what more you might be interested in
Zeljko Ivezic: also today.
Zeljko Ivezic: what
Zeljko Ivezic: you might be interested.
Zeljko Ivezic: Yeah, once I have a daughter, and
Zeljko Ivezic: she sometimes uses my.
Zeljko Ivezic: So she both the
Zeljko Ivezic: and
Zeljko Ivezic: and I was giving a public lecture, and in the middle of the lecture, in disconnected maintenance, and all of a sudden there is Amazon
Zeljko Ivezic: alert.
Zeljko Ivezic: Any other questions?
Zeljko Ivezic: All right. 50.
Zeljko Ivezic: Stay for the day, and I will see you next week.
Zeljko Ivezic: Bye. Everyone on zoom
Lovro: thank you.
Akshay Kumar Remeshan: Bye.